[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to look at the extended rational numbers and
how they can come up in practice we'll have a look
at how they can help us in analysis how they can
help us in projective geometry and how they can
shed some light on the geometry of a circle and
we'll start out by reviewing these somewhat new
algebraic objects an extension of the rational
number system to include Infinity okay so here are
the rational numbers and here is this new number
system that we've recently introduced the extended
rational numbers this is not the only possible
way of extending the rational numbers there are
lots of different ways of enlarging our number
system for example later on we're going to talk
about complex rational numbers where we extend
the rational numbers by adjoining a so-called
square root of minus one or I we'll also go in a
different direction adjoining a so-called square
root of two purely algebraically we've already
talked about the rational poly numbers which are
another way of extending a big way of extending
the rational numbers to a larger Arena and there's
lots of ways of combining things so for example we
could include an algebraic square root of two
and an algebraic square root of 3 at the same
time many many more possibilities all centered
on the rational number system which sits right
at the heart of mathematics and the real numbers
in case I haven't told you before play no role
the real numbers are a fiction they are a fantasy
a modern fantasy which we are determined to shoot
down okay and we're going to do that in fact
this part of this series is uh is really geared
towards that to cutting down the various erroneous
views of the real numbers that are currently out
there okay so one of the uh nice things about
doing what we're doing here is that it gives
you an example of an approach to extending the
number system I want to make sure that we are
adopting a a good point of view towards logical
rigor that we're going to be clear about the
objects or Expressions that form the basis of our
arithmetic when we're defining in and an extension
of a number system or a new number system we
have to make sure that we're very very clear
about what the objects are or the way I like to
think about it the Expressions that we write down
on the paper we've got to be precise about the
operations and the laws they satisfy there can
be no possible ambiguity we must be careful about
proofs proofs are an essential aspect of of such
things and throughout we are Guided by examples
and computations we want to look at a lot of
examples and make a lot of computations so that we
become confident about the validity of the various
abstract things that we've written down without
anchoring a theory in examples and computations
it's very easy to let it be like a hot air
balloon it just ends up in the stratosphere
Beyond logical grasp we want to avoid that we
want to avoid the current unfortunate Affairs
that are centered around the real numbers so
although we introduced the extended rational
numbers by first starting with integral points
in the plane and defining appropriate operations
on them in retrospect it's possible to start just
from the extended rational numbers and to Define
them as follows so an extended rational number
is a pair an ordered pair a b of integers written
more usually As A over B and crucially there's no
restriction on the integers A and B so B does not
have to be non zero B is allowed to be zero with
this notion of equality that A over B equal c/ D
precisely when this condition is satisfied now
this is not the first definition that I gave in
my last talk I had another definition which was
a little bit worder and which turned out not to
be such a good one a perceptive viewer noticed
that that definition that I wrote down had a
slight problem the problem was that according to
that definition 0 over 0 is not equal to 0 over
0 okay we do want 0 over 0 to equal 0 over 0 so
I'm going to shift to this definition of equality
for these pairs okay what is it let's have a look
so a over Bal C over D precisely when there exist
nonzero integers M and N satisfying all right
either of these two conditions they're really
the same so here is the condition in terms of
integral points that M * the point a equals
n * the point C D and what that means is exactly
this it means that M * a = n * C and M * b = n *
D so you can think that a certain
multiple of the first pair is equal
to a certain multiple of the second
pair and both of those multiples have
to be nonzero if that's satisfied then
A over B is said to be equal to C over
D now if neither of a b or CD is equal
to 0 0 then you can try to check that
this is equivalent to the simpler more
familiar condition that a D minus BC equal
0 okay here's a good exercise to show that
this notion of equality enjoys a transitive
property namely that if a over Bal C over D
and if C over D equal e over F in this sense
then a b equals e over F so if there's
a pair MN for this equality and there's
another pair say l k or whatever for this
equality then you can find a pair for this
equality any notion of equality ought to have
such a transitive aspect otherwise it sort of
doesn't sync with our natural intuition about
what equality means so this is a a good thing
to check for any notion of equality so that's
what our extended rational number is it's an
ordered pair of integers together with
this notion of equality so we have our
numbers now we have to Define operations
and there are four operations addition
multiplication subtraction and Division and
here are the operations on so a B plus C over
D is this a b * C over D is this a B minus
C over D is this and A over B / C over D is
this okay and then these operations are
well defined meaning that if you replace
A over B with an equal fraction say e
over F then what you're going to get on
this side is equal to what you get with the
A over B so the operations are well defined
and they are valid for any values a b c d
integer values there's no restriction on
denominators and it turns out they obey the
usual commutative associative distributive laws
for example p + q = q + p p + q- r R is p + Q - R
distributive law p * Q + r = p * Q + P * R and so
on and this new number system which we going to
call the extended rationals or rat Infinity has
some special elements that play important role so
0 over one is important thing usually called zero
one over one usually called one Min -1 over
one usually call minus one these are familiar
rational numbers but we also have some unfamiliar
new numbers 1 / Z which we're writing also with
this symbol and calling it infinity and 0 over
Z which we're writing with this symbol and we
don't quite yet have a name for that we're all
thinking about what a good name for Z over Z
is all right so the operations are completely cut
and dried one can check all the laws please do
please work out lots of examples convince yourself
that this arithmetic really is consistent that
there are no logical errors anywhere and if there
are please don't be afraid of embarrassing me send
a comment say this this law doesn't work or this
relation doesn't hold you got to make sure that
everything works and examples and computations
are the way practically speaking that we check
that and now it's interesting to observe that the
familiar rational numbers that we leared about
back in Primary School can actually be recovered
from these extended rational numbers and how do
we do that how do we get rational numbers from
rational numbers with infinity well first of
all we have to restrict our attention to those
extended rational numbers A over B where B is
not equal to zero that's the familiar look of
a rational number and then we can replace the
equality with the simpler equality because now
these guys are never both zero so the notion
of equality becomes simpler just a over Bal
C over D precisely when a D minus b c equal
0 the four operations are just as before but there
is one important thing that we're prohibited from
doing that we used to be able to do up here but
we are no longer able to do in this domain what's
that we are not allowed to divide by zero so we
are not allowed to take a B / 0 over 1 we exclude
that because if we did that then the result
would be a a rational number with a zero in
the denominator which we're agreeing is out of the
picture so arguably the case could be made that
the extended rational number system is actually
more natural than the rational number system
there are no sort of strange prohibitions the
extended rational number systems works with
all pairs A over B and all of the operations are
are well defined even division all the time okay
but a natural question is that's good what are the
extended rational numbers good for okay they are a
way of getting the rational numbers if we wanted
to but we don't need to develop the rational
numbers this way so what else is the extended
rational number system good for in practice well
let's start by explaining what it's not good for
so the extended rational number system is probably
not good for economics why not well when we're
talking about money dollars then there's a big
difference between a very big positive number and
a very big negative number so here is zero here
is a sort of expanded number system where the
first unit here is 1 trillion maybe $1 trillion
$2 trillion $3 trillion as we go in this direction
we get more and more happy right it's nice to have
lots of money when we go in this direction in the
minus direction we're talking about debt minus1
trillion - 2 trillion minus 3 trillion these days
debt is a big a big issue around the world and
and justifiably so we are increasingly unhappy
as our debt get gets increasingly overwhelming
and many viewers will be familiar with national
debts which are uh much bigger than than these
big numbers here okay so the point is that when
we're talking about something like money there's
a big difference between a very large number
which sort of approaching Infinity in this
direction and a very large negative number
in this direction in words plus infinity is
certainly nowhere near being equivalent or or
the same as minus infinity so having a number
system where there's only one infinite value where
if you go in this direction and you go in this
direction you end up with the same Infinity
that does not model economic situation very
well but the extended rational numbers are are
good for some other things we'll see that they're
good for geometry particular projective geometry
and parts of analysis and algebra so maybe I
should say that you know what number system
or algebraic structure to use in a particular
situation depends on the situation it doesn't
really make sense to say absolutely well what
is finally the only way of dealing with infinity
there's possibly different approaches or different
Frameworks that include some notion of infinity
and some Frameworks might be useful for certain
problems and other Frameworks might be useful for
other problems so a few videos back I asked you to
think about extending uh arithmetic to integers
and if you did that problem you will have found
that there was sort of a a framework for doing
sort of partial arithmetic with integers where
there was a plus infinity and a minus infinity and
they were different right so there's not just one
approach to introducing Infinity as an element
of our arithmetic this is an important point
a number system is something that we create and
we give names to those things the main Criterion
is that it's logically consistent and it works
logically and two that it has some practical use
other words we should not be dogmatic about
number systems there's lots of them around
and we ought to be prepared to be flexible
towards them all right so let's have a look
at how we might employ Infinity in the extended
rational number system to help us graph rational
poly numbers in other words to Aid us in our
understanding of calculus and Analysis this is
just a introduction to this idea I will probably
at some later Point expand on uh this idea okay
so suppose we have a rational Pol number like
1 + 2 Alpha over 1- Alpha which corresponds to
the function in first year usually written y = 1
+ 2x over 1 - x all right so first year students
are hopefully able to graph such a a function
and for us that means well plotting a certain
number of points within a certain range in the XY
plane and then basically joining those points to
get some kind of picture of the values of this
polum at least in a certain range all right so
this particular one has the property that as
the value that you're substituting approaches
one this denominator gets close to zero so the
whole thing becomes uh rather sensitive and it
either blows up like gets increasingly large if
the value is just a little bit less than one or
it gets uh it gets big negative if the value is
a little bit bigger than one so this arm kind of
goes up in that direction towards Infinity in some
sense while this arm goes down in that direction
towards Infinity there's also something like that
happening on the horizontal level when the value
that we introduced for Alpha gets very big then
this thing is very close to minus 2 approaches
this value here and that's also true when the
value we sub is a big negative number also get
something close to minus two means geometrically
this arm is also ultimately going to approach this
horizontal line and this arm here is also going to
approach this uh horizontal line this one from the
top this one from the bottom all right so what do
the extended rational numbers do for us well first
of all they allow us to substitute a certain value
for example we can calculate R of one if we plug
one into here we will get 3 over 0 now usually
that's frowned upon but if we have an approach
where extended rational numbers are allowed we
might say well that's not so unreasonable that's
the thing that we're usually calling infinity and
suppose we uh carry on and say well what happens
if we substitute Infinity into the expression
can we do that other words if we take Alpha and
replace it with 1 / Z and just do arithmetic with
within the extended rational numbers what do we
get so we get 1 + 2 * 1 / 0 well when you do that
that's still 1 over 0 and 1 - 1 /0 is also you can
check 1 /0 and when you do that quotient you get 0
over Z which is our Strange uh number that doesn't
have a name yet however pictorially we saw that
when the values get large either large positive
or large negative the the limit in some sense
we haven't defined this properly but I'm just
making a suggestive symbol here the limit seems
to be approaching minus 2 this is not necessarily
inconsistent because we have this intuition that
this star is kind of an open-ended thing it's um
it sort of represents all possibilities so maybe
there's some kind of consistency here but clearly
we have to be a little bit uh we have to be a
little bit careful about what's going on okay
so that's that's interesting but something more
interesting happens when we we think about the
possibility of actually pictorially visualizing
this point at Infinity so down in this diagram
here I've shown you another vers of this this
picture it's a little bit small it's now on a
square where the X AIS here goes starting from
zero here one here and then all the way up to
here and at this point it's reached Infinity in
this direction minus one there and infinity there
similarly in the y direction 0 1 2 Infinity 0 -1
- 2 Infinity so there's only one Infinity so this
infinity and this Infinity are the same so we
really should think about wrapping this square
around so that this side is glued to this side
and similarly this side should be glued to this
side so that that infinity and that Infinity are
really the same what's good about that is that
then this picture would be condensed in such a way
that the whole thing would fit on the Square if we
could somehow make this kind of compression where
we replace this this infinite line which right
now presently goes forever in that direction to
a very finite line segment it means we have the
potential of representing the whole graph not just
part of it but the whole graph in one picture and
when we do that the picture looks something like
this so we get a curve that actually goes through
this point here Infinity minus 2 and then it
goes up through here something like this and
eventually it gets exactly to this point here
and then this point is exactly the same as this
one so it just carries on and it gets to this
point and this point is exactly the same as
that one we see that in this way the the curve
is actually a continuous curve in a very real
sense the remarkable discontinuity between
this and this is actually somehow circumvented
here by the fact that Infinity is playing
the role of a big number and a very big
negative number at the same time that's
what the extended rational numbers do for
us all right so this is not a rigorous
explanation at all this is just a a bit
of a hand waving possibility for future thought
some of you might like to play around with this
to see well how might we compress the the line
and replace it with just a finite segment like
that in other words what kind of scale would
we have to use here it have to be nonlinear
naturally but what would be a good scale what
would be the actual shape of this curve and if
we actually did the gluing and glued the square
around to form a Taurus and then the X and Y axes
would end up being circles on this Taurus then
you could ask well what does the curve look like
it would actually be a curve going around
the Taurus in a certain way actually closed
curve and that kind of story wouldn't just happen
with this relatively simple rational polum but
even more complicated rational Pol numbers we
could hope that something like this could be
happening and we might be in a position to view
the whole graph all at once so that's definitely
the possibility that's quite interesting and
that's open to us by thinking about the extended
rational number system another important use of
the extended rationals is to projective geometry
where in fact I think it's fair to say the
idea really has its origins in essentially
the work of Mobius and pler at the beginning
of the 19th century when they developed the
idea that the projective line could be viewed via
homogeneous coordinates so let's just say a few
words about that story so here's an apine line
which is just like a familiar one-dimensional
line with regularly spaced uh points 0 1 2 - one
- 2 rational number is possibly inside there's
also something called a projective line and
that's something of an extension of the apine
line where we take the apine line and we add one
more point and this point that we add is called
infinity and we think about this point as being
somehow what you get to when you go infinitely
in that direction and it's also what you get to
when you go infinitely in this direction so you
go infinitely in either of these directions
whatever that means and you get to this point
Infinity so which closes up the aine line to
form essentially some kind of loop object now
admittedly that's a little bit vague but uh
in the 19th century Mobius and pler realized
how to make this completely precise and how to
replace this kind of vague diagram with something
completely cut and dried which is very much in
the spirit of the last few videos and you'll
you'll recognize U very pictures that we've shown
many times so the point is to move to a two diim
dimensional situation a two-dimensional Aline
plane coordinates X and Y as usual and to think
about lines through the origin so the
great Insight is that the projective
line can be thought about being lines
in the apine plane through the origin
in other words the projective line is
exactly the space of lines through the
origin how does that link with this picture
well you take a line through the origin let's
say this one here and you see where it meets
this particular line which I sometimes called
the viewing line okay it's the line where y
equal 1 so you can see this line here meets
the line Y = 1 at this point here which is
the point 21 so this line is labeled by that
point or by that Vector in the plane 2 one but
this line of course also passes through other
integral points like 42 - 6 - 3 and others
and the idea of homogeneous coordinates is
to say that we're going to agree that
all of these are equal the two little
dots means a proportion so the proportion 2: 1
is the same as the proportion 4:2 is the same
as the proportion - 6 to -3 if we change the
line a little bit say to this one here then it
goes to the point Min -1 comma 1 and the line
itself gets the label homogeneous coordinates
-1 to 1 which is the same thing as - 2 to
2 same as minus same as 17 to- 17 and many
others another important example is the vertical
line which goes through the point 01 and so it
gets homogeneous coordinate 0 to 1 that proportion
and another important example is the horizontal
line which goes through the point one comma 0
and so gets homogeneous coordinates 1 to0 the
proportion 1 to0 now this proportion is just as
valid a proportion as this one just as valid as
a proportion as all the others course as a
fraction if we think about fractions 2 over
1 = 4 over 2 that's all right -1 over 1 same as
17 over -7 0 over 1 is also a valid fraction but
1/ Z is not a valid fraction but this is not
a fraction says Mobius and pler this is just
a pair of coordinates forming proportion
so that's of course exactly the same kind
of thing that we're doing when we introduce
our extended rational numbers right we first
defined our arithmetic on integral points and
then we group those points together lying on
the various lines and there was only one
kind of sort of special really odd point
which was the the most important point in
the picture the point where all the lines
pass through the origin coordinat 0 0 we saw
that we had to sort of separate that out as
a separate entity not belonging to any of the
lines officially that's a separate object uh
that we get to the extended rational numbers so
another way of saying it is that the projective
line can be thought of as the extended
rational numbers once you remove the 0 over
Z so there's a natural connection between
projective geometry and the extended rational
number system where this line is just as valid a
line as any other and ultimately corresponds to
what we're calling Infinity 1 over zero finally
I'd like to show you how the extended rational
numbers help us coordinati the circle or in fact
a general conic so what we're going to do we're
going to augment the picture on the last Slide by
introducing also a circle but it's not going to
be a circle centered at the origin it's going to
be a circle which passes through the origin and
I'm going to choose a circle of radius one or
quadrant one which is sitting above the x-axis
with Center the point 01 in fact the story is
the same no matter what conic we chose as long
as it goes goes through the origin the point is
that when we've done that then the projective
line of lines through the origin corresponds
exactly to points on this circle so to every
line through the origin there's a unique point
on the circle and to every point on the circle
there's a unique line through the origin and
this is without any exception that's including
the hor horizontal line so for example this
line here what's the corresponding point on
the circle well you just look to see where this
line meets the circle it always meets The Circle
at 0 0 because the circle goes through there but
this line will also meet the circle in a second
Point namely that one there and since this
is the line that corresponds to the extended
rational number 2 over 1 we can say that this
Point has coordinates on the circle 2 over
1 this point will have coordinate 1 over one
3 over one will be down here a half would be
somewhere over here a 10th will be somewhere
over here this point would be 0 over 1 this
would be -1 - 2 - 3 - 20 - 1,000 and what about
this point itself well that point corresponds to
the horizontal line which meets the circle in
essentially a double Point here so the actual
origin which lies on the circle is associated to
the um the extended rational number 1 / Z what
we're calling Infinity so we get a correspondence
between points on the circle and extended rational
numbers without our 0 over Z okay 0 over Z
does not get matched up with any point on the
circle this is then a correspondence between
the projective line and a circle which is very
important in projective geometry it's crucially
important and explains many many many things so
there's much more to be said about this but
at least you have one very clear and and good
application uh to to conics of thinking about the
extended rational number system including Infinity
so now all the line is sort of wrapped around
the circle and infinity gets the pride of place
by being mapped to this point here and you can see
how this naturally can connects with that earlier
discussion of graphs of U poly numbers because if
we want to make a sort of finite picture of the
line well this is a good way of doing it here's
a finite picture of the whole line we've got the
whole line mapped to this finite circle with a
point at at Infinity mapped to the bottom that's
very nice all right there's a lovely exercise that
I want to tell you about here that's associated to
this picture which is to describe these operations
of addition and multiplication on our extended
rational numbers geometrically in terms of points
on the circle so for example if we have the point
2 over one corresponding to the number two and
maybe the point 3 over one then adding 2 over
one and 3 over1 gives 5 over 1 so we get the
sum of this point and this point would be a0
5 over one a little bit further down while the
product of those two points would be the point
6 over one even a little bit further down the
question is how would you describe or construct
the sum or the product of two points on the circle
purely geometrically say with ruler and Compass
it's a great exercise it's U quite hard um so it
might take you several weeks months maybe even
thinking about okay it's a great project how to
describe arithmetic geometrically on the circle
so we've had a few examples today of how the
extended rational numbers actually can be of
some use in analysis and in geometry and there
are other applications of them as well so next
time we want to get back to our main thrust which
of course is somewhat negative to try to explain
the deficiencies with a modern approach to real
numbers in particular we want to address the idea
of a limit and can we introduce real numbers as
limits of Koshi sequences of rational numbers most
analysts will say well yes of course that's what
we do but it's in fact wrong it doesn't work and I
want to start to set up the necessary Concepts so
that we can understand the the usual approach and
why in fact doesn't work why it goes off the
rails so in particular next time we're going
to start talking about limits we've talked about
limits informally in a couple of places so far in
this series next time we want to start being more
concrete and careful what exactly is a limit of a
sequence now we do have sequences because we got
rational Pol numbers to generate sequences we can
talk about limits we can examine the situation
and start to get a sense of what goes wrong
with limits I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening